If our body here on the page,
our declaration here on the page says that
our font is Arial, what would happen
if I start by just saying ul?
And I am going to put in a font-family for
this, probably something like times.
What do you predict is going to happen
when I do that here on the page?
How many people say the font stays Arial?
How many people say the font goes to ul or
it goes to our times?
Okay, everybody here on the page
says it goes to times, so
let's make sure that that is true,
font-family: Times;.
I'll even be lazy and
just do times like that.
Okay, well, so it all went to times,
why did that happen?
>> Specificity.
>> Is it specificity?
>> Am I misusing that?
>> Specificity might be part of it, times
in the font-family property is inherited.
We have our ul right here that
starts our entire list, and
we just said ul should be times.
So it's times, and it is then, therefore,
inherited by all of its children.
So we have times being inherited
by the ordered list, see that,
and the unordered lists inside of it.
So it's not gonna select just the ul's and
not the ol's,
it's gonna select the ul at the top,
and then due to inheritance,
it's going to inherit the whole
way through the entire list.
That's what's going on there, okay?
Likewise, if we just said
something like color, oops,
color: red; also one of my favorites.
Everything is going to turn red,
except for the links.
So that's why things tend
not to work as expected.
It could be something like this.
So that is just the ul by itself.
Let's take a look at a class and
how a class works.
I'm pretty sure you guys
know how this works.
So if I just said .nested instead,
then only my nested list
is going to inherit that.
And again,
color: red is an inherited property.
So because my li here has a class
of nested, the ol inside of it and
the ul inside of that and the ol inside
of that, all of that will turn red.
And then the last one, and
do I have an id in here?
I do, I have a last id.
So if I said my last
item had the color red,
then the li with that id would have that.
Okay, so this is probably the stuff
you're familiar with here, right?
How many times can an id appear on a page?
One time, right?
So we can't reuse id's, they tend not to
really be used much in CSS styling for
that reason,
tend to be used more with JavaScript.
You can use them with CSS though.
Now, it is possible to also
group together your selectors.
And so we could do that, we could say,
for example, our last, .nested.
So these are comma separated,
these are groups together.
So each one of these parameters
is evaluated independently, okay?
So we evaluate last and we apply a color.
We evaluate nested, we apply the color.
They are not necessarily all
those things have to exist, so
I could say, I don't know,
george, last and george, okay?
Last is still gonna turn red,
george isn't anywhere on this page.
But it's a legit CSS selector, and
CSS perfectly happy to ignore it.
Just not there on the page, okay?
So that is what a group
of selectors look like.
You can make all of
those quite complicated.
All right, then we start to
get a little bit crazier, and
that is the descendant selectors.
So what is a descendant selector?
You wanna have a definition for
a descendant selector?
>> Selecting something that's
exclusively a child of another element.
>> Maybe, yeah.
So let's talk about families.
[LAUGH] Families are always a challenge.
So, here at the very top of our family,
we have a ul, we have an immediate child.
[COUGH] That's this first li right here,
okay?
We also have a second child.
That's the second li here.
And we can simplify this just by turning
up the little triangles here in our
HTML and looking at this, right?
So this ul has one, two, three, four,
five, six, seven, eight children.
Yeah, and they're all li's.
So that is the first level,
that's just directly a parent-child
relationship, right?
What is the relationship of
these li's to each other?
What would they be considered
to be in a family tree?
>> Siblings?
>> They are siblings, right?
We have first siblings,
we have last siblings,
we have all the siblings in between.
So those are siblings, and
we have siblings selectors that
are targeting those, okay?
We also have,
just to remind you of this as well, right?
So that second li has
some children as well.
It's child is singular,
has one child, it is an ol, okay?
So what is the relationship
between this ul and this ol?
What is the relationship between that
first ul and that ol there on line seven?
>> Grandchildren.
>> They're grandchildren, right, okay?
So yes, that is absolutely true.
In human families, they would be
grandchildren, here we just call them
descendants, because after parents and
children, we just lose track.
They're all descendants, okay?
So that ol, this ul, and
all of its children, [LAUGH] and it's ol.
And this a, if we go all the way
down here in line 15 in this a,
it is related to that first ul,
they are descendants, Okay?
That is useful to know because then we
start to write selectors based on that.
So the selector that you write
all the time, That would
look something like this,
let's say ul a, okay?
So let's turn all of the links red, ul a.
So, a is going to be descended from ul,
and this starts to bring in,
one of the other things is
going to be on my gravestone.
Which is that when you're
working with selectors,
you want to read them from right to left,
even though you're writing
them from left to right, okay?
So, yes, we write it as ul a,
but the way we read this is for
all a elements that
are descended from ul elements.
In this case, we select all of the links
here because we determined all of them
are related back to that first ul.
How could we make this more
specific to nested unordered lists?
Anyone have an idea how we could
make that more specific just to
the nested unordered lists?
You can think about this
one here on line 10.
No, don't use the class.
How can we make it more specific?
So one way we could do that is we could
just line up more parameters here.
We could say ul ul a, Right?
So now, we have a pattern.
So we're looking at a pattern of a ul,
that's the parent.
We have a ul inside of that, and
then we have a link inside of that.
So that's how we got there.
Now, the ordered list also matches that
pattern, cuz we have a ul on line 4,
we have a ul on line 10, and
we have a link on line 15.
So that second link is
also fits that pattern.
>> In chat,
we have ul descendant selector a.
So they put ul.nested and ul, li a.
>> Yeah,
>> My guess is.
>> There are many guesses and
there's many ways to do this.
With so many elements to choose from,
we can write all kinds of
levels of selectors, right?
I always write all kinds
of levels of selectors.
Okay, so that is the concept
of a descendant selector.
They have their space separated, and
they line up here all in a row,
just like this.
Now, we also have the, specifically
a parent-child relationship, right?
We talked about just a parent-child.
So what if we were interested in,
let's say the, looking at my list here.
Let's say we wanna select,
The second ol right here, okay?
So not the first ol but the second ol.
Let's say we wanna select that,
how might we go about doing that?
Anybody have any ideas?
Sometimes it helps just to
sort of tidy up your HTML,
you can always fold up
what's not important.
>> Do we wanna target an ol, li, ol?
>> Yeah.
>> That's descendant of a list item as to
send them down the list.
Ul, li, ol, excuse me.
>> Okay, so, ul, li, ol,
that's what you're saying?
>> Yeah.
>> Okay, and let's say,
border: 1px solid blue.
Okay, so that's not quite specific enough.
What else could we do?
There are many, many possibilities.
So one thing we could try, we have a ul,
we have an li, we have an ol.
We have a ul, and we have an ol, right?
What if we did ul, ol, ul, ol?
Yeah, that's totally it, that's what
you meant, ul, ol, ul, ol, okay?
So that's gonna put
a border around the list.
What if I want a border around
the list items, what would I add?
>> Li.
Now, it's around the list items.
See the difference, Okay?
So you can string these things together.
Now, obviously, this kind of pattern
matching, a takes a lot of time, right,
which is part of the reason that
we love to you use classes.
And B, what happens if that pattern
appears somewhere else on your page and
then you wind up getting
some unexpected styling?
Yes, yes to all of that,
that is absolutely true.
If you were writing a custom webpage and
you have complete control over the HTML
and complete control over the CSS,
this can feel a little bit sketchy to you.
But I know there are many of you out
there who are working in WordPress,
and sometimes you don't have
access to the HTML when
you're winding up putting
in styling like this.
You're working in Squarespace,
you're working in Wix,
you're working in Webflow,
you're working in
all kinds of different platforms where
maybe you don't have access to the HTML.
You've got to work with the HTML you have,
not the HTML you wish you had.
And so that's where sometimes these kinds
of really weirdo selectors can come
in super handy.
Because you're trying to target
some things on this page that
you are just not able to do otherwise.
I agree,
this gets a little bit ridiculous.
But today, we are investigating what
we can, not necessarily what we should.
That is the set of selectors that you are
probably most familiar with at this point
in time.
We had just HTML elements,
they're called type selectors.
We had classes, we had id's,
we had groups of selectors, and
we had descendant selectors.
Those are probably five that
you were using most commonly.
Very fast review of all those, and
then we're gonna come back and
we're gonna get into our parent-child or
adjacent and general sibling selectors and
attribute selectors.